April 26, 1986, interview with Henry Tom Heyer,
Vietnam veteran, Marine Corps helicopter pilot.
OK, Tom, how did you happen to be in the service?
Were you drafted or volunteered? Well, after I
finished college in August
of 1965, I immediately got an induction notice
from the Army. And knowing that if I was drafted as
such, that I wouldn't have any choice as to what my
job would be in the service. And I had also always
sort of wanted to fly. And I thought this might be a
good opportunity. So rather than letting the Army
draft me, I volunteered for the Air Force and I went
ahead and took the Air Force entrance exams and the
Air Force physical and would have been accepted
however they had filled their quota so they
wouldn't take me and in the meantime I had gone up
for my induction physical and all that and was
about to receive orders to report and I got a phone
call from the Marine recruiter and he said that he
had access to the Air Force test and the like and
that if I would consider being in the Marine Corps
that they would try to get me into the air wing and
use the Air Force test and the Air Force physical so
I wouldn't have to go through all that again. So I
went ahead and joined the Marine Corps. And
actually signed papers in October of 65 and
reported for duty in January of 66.
And
went through officer's school in Quantico,
Virginia in January, February and March of 66.
And then when I received my commission in March of
66, I reported for flight school. Let's see. It was
in May, May of 66. In the meantime, I stayed up in
Quantico with some other officers waiting for
orders to report to flight school. And
got married. in the meantime also and reported to
Pensacola, Florida in May. I think it was around
May the 15th, I'm not really sure about the date,
and went through flight school and ended up in
helicopters. There was a division in flight
school from, you could go for jets or helicopters
and, but the cutoff for jets was pretty high and
didn't quite make it so they went to helicopters
and actually ended up in reporting in Vietnam I
believe it was Halloween day in 1967 and
was in
Nam from
October 67 to November 68,
during which time was
the now famous Tet Offensive.
About where were you stationed,
and if more than one place, can you tell us that?
Yeah, when I originally reported into Vietnam,
flew into Da Nang, and from there went to, of course
it was just the next day, went to Phu Bai and joined
HMM 362 helicopter squadron. And stayed in Phu
Bai,
let's see, until I believe it was about mid-March
of 68.
And from Fubai, one aboard ship, I'd get them mixed
up whether it was on the Iwo Jima first or the
Princeton, but one or the other one aboard ship,
the squadron was actually aboard ship until I
believe it was about September of 68. So from March
to September we were aboard ship and when we
disembarked we went to Marble Mountain which was
just outside of Da Nang and operated in the
southern part. I call it the southern, it's still
the northern part of South Vietnam but as far as I
Corps was concerned it was the southern part.
While operating in Fubai, we had medevac. It was
mainly medevac and CNC. CNC being command and
control. Also called in the ranks the Ragpicker
Express, where you'd go.
I flew the H-34. It's a Sikorsky,
antiquated Sikorsky helicopter. And it was the
last of the reciprocating engine helicopters.
And it was the best bullet bouncer in the world. It
had this big R-18-20 engine sitting right there in
front of you for your bullet bouncer. But we ran
like I said, medevac and CNC. And the CNC part was we
might go to Da Nang and we would fly wing them on a
Huey, which would have some kind of brass, a kernel
or very seldom in general, but flying around to
different locations, checking on different
headquarters and the like. Pick them up in Da Nang
and fly them up to Phu Bai or Quang Tri or Dong Ha, and
they would check on operations there with the
command, and then fly them back home, and that
would be home being Da Nang. That'd be a full day's
operation for us. And other than that, we would
have an occasional recon insert or extract.
But you could probably say the main priority of our
squadron was medevac. Actually, my first flight
in country was medevac.
We had, well I was there for I guess maybe two days
before I actually did any flying. And I
can't remember the lieutenant's name that I went
out with on that first flight, but it was quite a
memorable experience in the fact that we went to,
we were operating out of Quang Tri. Well, of course
our squadron was based in Phu Bai, but we would send
out different aircraft to different operating
areas to run medevac and that day we were running
out of Quang Tri and
our first evacuation was 16
KIAs and about 20 wounded and it was quite a
gruesome awakening for your first flight in
country, you know, to think that boy, you know, I
hope the hell is not like this the whole 13 months.
Was it all United States people? Yeah, right. It
was all Marine Corps. We were, it was strictly
Marine Corps in that area. At that time the Army had
not moved in at all.
but that really and truly that was a rude awakening
but I can't remember right off the top of my head
that we had a worse day after that we had some more
some days with more action in them but never had a
day where we evacuated that many KIAs out of one
zone. It was pretty gruesome, where
it was. What was your opinion of the one-year tour
of duty for the US soldiers? Well,
at least having a definite time span, you felt like
that you had a target to shoot for and that you were
going to come home, versus like in World War II and
the like, where people spent years over there.
Stayed in for the duration. Right, and had no idea
when they would be able to come home. But then
again,
well, just like reporting for anything the first
time, When you first got there, you had a vague idea
because you had indoctrination before you went.
You had a vague idea about how it was going to be.
But starting from day one, it's a learning
experience no matter what people tell you. And you
fall into the routine, you get the idea of
what's actually going on, even though you don't
really have a real good idea of why you're there.
But you get to know the people in your outfit and
what your daily routine is. And over a period of
time, you get more proficient at your job. Being a
helicopter pilot,
when I went to Vietnam, I believe I had like 125
flight hours. And when you get to 500 flight hours,
you are eligible to be a HACC, which is a helicopter
aircraft commander. Prior to that, you're a H2P,
which is a helicopter second pilot. So during
those first 500 hours, You're
sitting second seat. You're learning. Of course,
you definitely have responsibilities and the
like, but it's a learning process before you get to
the position of 500 hours and being an aircraft
commander. Which takes a while. I can't remember
exactly when I did become a hack.
But let's see, it was probably around in February,
making me have been there, what, November,
December, January, about four months. It may have
been before that, I don't know.
During this time, you're learning, you're
getting proficient at your job. You're learning
the ins and outs of everything. And then you
get to a point to where you are about as proficient
as you're going to get at that particular job. And
Not so much in the case of helicopter pilots, but
evidently but occasionally it does happen where
you would get a helicopter aircraft commander be
drawn out of that particular MOS and being sent to
another school to be a forward observer. And what
is MOS? That's military occupational specialty.
My MOS was helicopter pilot. Then you had changes
of MOS, like just referred to going to a
forward observer or whatever. H2P? No. No, H2P is
helicopter second pilot. Yeah, but
so during this period of time, the person may be
drawn out to be a forward observer, and then that
might be a three-month stint, then put back into a
squadron. During that time, well, when you put
back in a squadron, you haven't forgotten how to
fly, but you're still going to have another period
of learning experience,
which knocks off the productivity of the
individual because they've been away from their
job for a while. Also, along
this line,
with having a specific time span to spend in
Vietnam,
you lose some proficiency in the fact that after a
person gets halfway,
they're thinking that it's downhill from then on.
They're looking to go home. They start being a
little more conservative. The closer you get to
going home, the more conservative you get.
In the air wing, we really had it. It was pretty well
understood that you were going to perform the
whole way through. In our squadron, anyway, you
flew right up until the last week. If you made it
that far, they'd give you the last week off. You
might have an easy CNC run or something like that,
but they'd definitely take you off of medevac.
But then there were definitely some people who
just flat, if they were on medevac, They wouldn't
take that extra little edge. They wouldn't go that
extra little bit to try and go in and pick somebody
up if the zone was hot.
Even when they were ordered to? Right. Of course,
it's
hard to say that you were ordered to because it was
I'd say 98% of the time, pilot discretion as to
whether you would go into an LZ or not, whether you
would jeopardize yourself, your machine, and
your crew to go in and pick up possibly one person.
Prime cases of this, prime instances,
There were a few times, and I say few because there
were definitely more than one, where, and it
always seemed to happen on night medevac, you'd
get an emergency medevac, go in and pick up the guy,
taking all kinds of chances because you'd be, the
only thing, the only lighting you would have to go
into an LZ would be maybe a heat tab or, or if you were
lucky, a flashlight or something like that.
What's a heat tab? Okay, a heat tab is a little
tablet that, it's a phosphorus-type tablet you
would use to heat your C-rations. And it gives off a
small glow. It's mostly heat, but there is a blue
flame to it. And you can see it a little bit, but not
very well from the helicopter. Okay. And it's not
much of a navigational device. The heat tabs will
be on the ground there. Right, right. And so you try
to find your LZ with the help of a heat tab and go and
pick up somebody like that maybe suffering from a
case of malaria. And like I say, that happened on
more than one occasion. And it's a damn shame
that... You would have to go in at night,
especially, risking the crew and the helicopter.
And possibly even, if you missed the zone, crash
into some of the troops or something for somebody
with a cotton pick in case of malaria. Actually,
we lost
one entire crew. I don't know if the reason for the
medevac is lost in my mind right now because of the
circumstances that came afterwards. But we had an
entire crew go out on a night medevac, and they were
being vectored by the ground control by radar. And
they vectored them right into the side of a
mountain. And we lost the whole crew. But I don't
know, perhaps that night it was a real emergency, a
do or die situation for the person on the ground.
Like I say, I don't remember. But we did lose a
complete crew because of that. Whose fault it was,
you really can't say. But things like that you
reflect back
on. How about after the halfway point? Were there
any changes personally in your attitudes or what
you did? Well, a
person really doesn't have to admit that maybe
they had a little drop in their enthusiasm about
doing their job but I'm sure to a certain extent
most everyone has some drop in enthusiasm and like
I mentioned before looking forward to that going
home date and taking a little bit less of a chance
but then again there are There are others who go for
it all the way. One of the crew, one member of the
crew that was killed in that incident I just
mentioned was a major, and he was due to go home the
next week.
Sort of a sad situation. He really shouldn't have
been on night medevac that night anyway, but I
think he volunteered for it. And that's just one of
the breaks of the game. If you're going to go,
you're going to go. So I guess you might as well put
out the whole way. But it's
a strong,
what would you say, tendency to protect yourself.
And when you reach the halfway point, you're
halfway home. and halfway home is what you're
thinking about.
Were you familiar with defoliation, and did you
see any effects of it? Well, I don't know if you
could really, if I could really say that it was
actually defoliation or not, but I know when I
first got to Vietnam, I was really impressed with
how beautiful the countryside was. It was really
lush and green, and no doubt about it, it was a
beautiful country.
Later on in my tour of Haiti, and especially
towards the end of it, it was quite evident how much
effect the war had on the country, just in the 12 to
13 months that I was there.
I believe actually in the area that we were in.
Which area was that? From Da Nang north. Da Nang up
through Fu Bai, Quang Tri, and Khe Sanh. All up in
that area, the countryside seemed to be just
totally pockmarked with B-52 strikes. It was just
devastating how much effect it had on it, just
crater after crater. You mean that would be the
effects of rolling thunder? We weren't familiar
with that terminology, but right.
It was really fascinating, though, how beautiful
the country was to begin with. And then after,
towards the end, you saw the destruction.
Absolutely. So you really didn't notice
defoliation and the leaves falling off the trees
to be able to help you see better on the ground? No,
not really. Any of the LZs or landing zones that we
went into were, of course, I don't know, when
you're down there, In a zone, picking up somebody,
you're not really looking at the scenery too
terribly much. It could have been evident in me not
noticing it at the time. The only time I really
noticed the countryside was flying at altitude,
you know, going from one place to another. And
whether it was actually from defoliation or not, I
couldn't say.
Okay, you mentioned earlier flying alongside the
Hueys. Can you describe the differences between
the H-34 helicopters you flew and the Hueys? Well,
the H-34, it's an antiquated aircraft. It's
completely retired now, I do believe. But like I
mentioned then, it was a It had a reciprocating
engine versus a jet engine like the Huey has.
What does reciprocating engine mean? Gasoline
piston driven.
Not as powerful? Pound for pound, much less
powerful.
We had a faster reaction time as far as the engine
was concerned than a jet.
The Huey, of course, is a much more up-to-date
aircraft. Being jet propelled and the like, it's
more maneuverable. And of course, it has higher
technology in it, more sophisticated weaponry
and the like. It's a more stable platform for the
weaponry. The H-34, we had a crew of the pilot,
co-pilot, crew chief, and a gunner. And when we had
medevac, we also had a corpsman aboard. The crew
chief and the gunner both had M60 machine guns.
It's a .30 caliber machine gun. And mounted in the
windows. And
crew chief on one side, gunner on the other, so they
could cover both sides of the aircraft. Of course,
the Huey, they were much more versatile than the
fact that some of them had rocket pods. Some of them
had a Gatling gun. The Huey Cobra gunship. It had
the whole smear. It was a two-man army right there.
Our squadron was strictly H-34s, what you would
call a utility squadron, I guess, in the fact that
we did a little bit of everything, but we were not an
arsenal. We had no firepower. We had the two M60s
for defense, and that was it. We were there for
extracting the wounded. We
put in some recon patrols. We would take out some
recon patrols.
But it was strictly plain vanilla as far as the
aircraft was concerned.
What was your opinion of the Vietnamese,
such as the South Vietnamese, North Vietnamese,
and the Viet Cong, and any
contact you had with them? How did you view them?
Did you view them as humans? How did you look at
them? Well, my contact with the Vietnamese of any
sort was very limited. We had hooch maids, like I
imagine most servicemen did over there, by the
fact that there were six or eight of us living in one
little old
built-up shack, which we called Hooch's. And I
believe I believe the fee for a hooch made was
somewhere around $30 a month. I'm not sure, but I
believe that sort of rings a bell. So you divide
that up with five or six people, and it's pretty
cheap to get your... The building swept out every
day, and they'd polish your boots, and they'd do
your washing and stuff like that. So it was quite
reasonable. And that was really the only contact
that I had with the Vietnamese... actually on a
person to person type basis and those women really
well they didn't speak English to begin with I
really didn't have any desire to try to carry on any
kind of a conversation with them anyway and
so that was really about the extent of my contact
with the Vietnamese as such. In observing,
though, we would fly in from place to place and land
in from place to place. And going to the exchange in
Da Nang, where we did our shopping for various
sundry items, there were some Vietnamese around
there.
The kids might come up to you a little bit, just like
they do in Mexico, wanting something for nothing.
But from stories that I heard prior, it was best to
leave them alone. And if you could at all do it in any
way at all, you had to avoid them. Cotton picking
kids coming up with grenades in their hands and
stuff like that and just booby trapping you or
throwing one in the helicopter while you're
sitting there waiting for somebody else to come
along. And it, for all practical purposes, you
wanted to stay away from it. As a people, I would say
they were very, very backward type people.
I would say probably upwards of 80% of the people.
It seemed like everywhere we were, anyway, that
maybe we were just coming in contact or observing
the downtrodden portion of them. But I'm sure that
the Vietnamese people as a whole were
downtrodden. But one thing really strikes me, a
couple of things, actually. as to the type of
people that they were. The
women,
they'd be out in the field gathering rice or
gathering firewood or whatever for their little
cook fires and stuff. And
if they had to go to the bathroom, it was amazing.
You know, they wore the black pajamas and all that,
the silken type pajamas. And they'd just roll up
their leg, the leg of the pajamas, and pull it over
the side and stand up and pee. Just like a cow
pissing on a flat rock is amazing. You know, you
can't have any respect for people that do that kind
of thing. How about taking a crab? Well, they
had a morning ritual. Actually, the only time I
observed it was after we were off ship and we were
based at Marble Mountain. And Marble Mountain is
right outside of Da Nang, so it's a pretty heavily
populated area. And early in the morning, around
between 7 and 8, you'd fly around to the north of Da
Nang And Da Nang was actually a harbor city, or I
guess you'd call it a city. And the northern beach
was commonly called Shit Beach. You'd fly there
between 7 and 8 o'clock in the morning, and that's
when everybody gets up. And they go out there, and
they take a crap out there right in the tidal
waters. Men and women? Men and women, kids,
everybody. And they'd just be lined up along the
beach, taking a crap out there in about a foot of
water and expecting the tide to take it out. And I
guess it did, because they kept on doing it. It was
amazing. So, you know, what kind of people are you
talking about?
So, you know, did the people ever even, were they
aware of... of what was going on in their country.
People like that are not well-informed. They
don't know politics.
I'm sure they were aware that their whole country
has been a war-torn country for as long as they can
remember and generations back, but they don't
know why. Probably didn't care. They don't care.
If they had their fish and their rice for three
meals a day or two meals a day, they'd be perfectly
satisfied.
So how about, how did you view them as a human being?
Let's say, if you would have seen a dead gook laying
there and also a dead American, did you make a
distinction between, well, that's a dead person,
American, And that's just a gook. What was the
distinction? Did you look at him as a human being or
not? Well,
yes, I did. I think that anything that has two legs
and stands upright and can carry on a
conversation, no matter how deep that
conversation can be as a human being, and it's a
damn shame that things like that do go on in the
world and the the really sad part about it is that
it's no matter who tries how hard it's going to go in
go on in the world until the end of time
okay when you flew medevac what effect did, seeing
all the death and destruction of
US soldiers, what effect did that have on you? And
how did you deal with it?
Well, it
has to have an effect on anyone, I'm sure. How much
you let it affect you is another thing. I think I can
consider myself as lucky as being one of the kind of
people, I don't think I'm a hard person, really and
truly I think I'm a pretty soft-hearted person,
but
something like that, I was fortunate enough to be
able to somewhat disconnect myself from, and I
think it He had a lot to do with my first flight in
country, which I was relating to earlier. I wish
I could remember the man's name that I flew with
that day, but when we extracted the 16 KIAs from one
LZ and all the wounded and everything. During
which time, of course, the H-34 only has capacity
of lifting about 12 fully laden combat troops. So
we had to make a number of trips in to make this many
extracts, or extract this many people. And during
which time, we had to refuel. And so we went into
Dong Ha to refuel. And we were sitting there
refueling, and this pilot was sitting there, and
he looked over at me and just started laughing, and
he started cracking jokes. And I was puzzled by
what he was doing, and later he told me that the only
way that he could cope with what he was doing out
there and seeing what he was seeing was to...
lighten up and take his mind off of it and think
about something else crack a joke or anything and I
can't remember what his worries were that's a
number of years ago but it hung with me and I think me
being with him during that first date of first day
of turmoil and tragedy that I saw prepared me for
the rest of the year. And it let me shrug off some of
this, detach myself from it, and not get
personally involved. There was one fellow that I
did go through. I went through OCS with him. I went
through flight school with him. And when we went to
Vietnam, we were assigned to different
squadrons.
He really let it get to him. And during his year over
there, he probably lost about 40 pounds by
worrying about it. And he lived through it. I don't
know how he is now. I haven't seen him since then.
But he was an absolute nervous wreck. There are
many, many tales, as you see on TV every now and
then. They bring up another tale about Vietnam and
all this, personal interviews and the like. where
so many people have let things get to them, and
blaming society and thinking that the US
government and the US people owe them a life and a
well-being for the rest of their days, which I
totally disagree with. A person goes over there to
do a job, And like, I would have been drafted, but I
did volunteer. And anyone that's in any service
besides the Army is a volunteer. And a lot of the
ones in the Army are volunteers. And
you're there to defend your country no matter what
the politicians
how bad they screwed up, or whatever. You're there
to defend your country, you're there to do the job
for your country, and you're laying your life on
the line for yourself, your country, your kids,
your family in the future. But did you ever
question why you were doing what you were doing?
Why they were making you do this?
I never have been much of a person to be involved in
politics and not that it would matter anyway. It
would probably just have pissed me off even more to
where maybe I would have been more adamant
about the situation.
Maybe it was just the way I was raised. You do your
stint for your country, and you do the best you can.
And if you lose a part of your body doing it, then
that's the way it happens. Luckily, I didn't lose
anything. I had a couple of holes in me, but I didn't
lose anything. And I don't feel like... the U.S.
government or the American people or society as a
whole owes me a thing. I did my job, and that was it.
Like I say, maybe it's the way I was raised, brought
up, thankful to my mother and father that I could
detach myself from the horror and tragedy that was
going on over there. And I'll also credit some to
the pilot that I was with. Not having, you know, I
didn't let it affect me mentally. Okay, why don't
you describe when you were wounded? Okay, let's
see. At the time, we were, the squadron was
based aboard ship
I don't remember if it was the Iwo Jima or the
Princeton, but we were on a CMC mission into
the northern area up around Da Nang and Khe Sanh
area, I mean, pardon me, Dong Ha in the Khe Sanh
area. And about halfway between Dong Ha and Khe
Sanh, was an LZ, totally secure LZ, called Camp
Carol. And it later changed its name, I don't
remember what to. But we had been running the Rag
Picker Express that day. Anybody that was being
transferred from one unit to another or new people
coming in or what have you, taken from maybe Quang
Tri to Dong Han and then to Camp Carroll or Khe Sanh
or whatever. And there had been a call that a recon
patrol had come into Camp Carroll and they needed
transportation back to Quang Tri. So we always
flew in twos and
I was helicopter commander at the time and we were
flying the second helicopter so we weren't the
point men and we were sitting in the LZ waiting to
pick up this recon patrol. We had radio
communication with the people on the ground and
uh they were trying to locate this recon patrol
that needed the transportation and we sat there i
guess it seemed like forever but it was probably
around 10 minutes
they were trying to locate this recon patrol and
couldn't find them couldn't find them and finally
they found out that they had been picked up by
someone else and already taken so we asked them if
they needed anybody else or if anybody else there
needed any transportation and they said well no